1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2022 Apr 13;13:861985. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2022.861985. eCollection 2022.

Pancreas Whole Tissue Transcriptomics Highlights the Role of the Exocrine 
Pancreas in Patients With Recently Diagnosed Type 1 Diabetes.

Välikangas T(1)(2), Lietzén N(1), Jaakkola MK(1)(2)(3), Krogvold L(4)(5), Eike 
MC(6), Kallionpää H(1), Tuomela S(1), Mathews C(7), Gerling IC(8), Oikarinen 
S(9), Hyöty H(9)(10), Dahl-Jorgensen K(4)(11), Elo LL(1)(2)(12), Lahesmaa 
R(1)(2)(12).

Author information:
(1)Turku Bioscience Centre, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University, 
Turku, Finland.
(2)InFLAMES Research Flagship Center, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.
(3)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Turku, Turku, 
Finland.
(4)Pediatric Department, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(5)Institute of Clinical Dentistry, Faculty of Dentistry, University of Oslo, 
Oslo, Norway.
(6)Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(7)Department of Pathology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, United 
States.
(8)Department of Medicine, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, 
Memphis, TN, United States.
(9)Faculty of Medicine and Health Technology, Tampere University, Tampere, 
Finland.
(10)Fimlab Laboratories, Pirkanmaa Hospital District, Tampere, Finland.
(11)Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, 
Oslo, Norway.
(12)Institute of Biomedicine, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.

Although type 1 diabetes (T1D) is primarily a disease of the pancreatic 
beta-cells, understanding of the disease-associated alterations in the whole 
pancreas could be important for the improved treatment or the prevention of the 
disease. We have characterized the whole-pancreas gene expression of patients 
with recently diagnosed T1D from the Diabetes Virus Detection (DiViD) study and 
non-diabetic controls. Furthermore, another parallel dataset of the whole 
pancreas and an additional dataset from the laser-captured pancreatic islets of 
the DiViD patients and non-diabetic organ donors were analyzed together with the 
original dataset to confirm the results and to get further insights into the 
potential disease-associated differences between the exocrine and the endocrine 
pancreas. First, higher expression of the core acinar cell genes, encoding for 
digestive enzymes, was detected in the whole pancreas of the DiViD patients when 
compared to non-diabetic controls. Second, In the pancreatic islets, 
upregulation of immune and inflammation related genes was observed in the DiViD 
patients when compared to non-diabetic controls, in line with earlier 
publications, while an opposite trend was observed for several immune and 
inflammation related genes at the whole pancreas tissue level. Third, strong 
downregulation of the regenerating gene family (REG) genes, linked to pancreatic 
islet growth and regeneration, was observed in the exocrine acinar cell 
dominated whole-pancreas data of the DiViD patients when compared with the 
non-diabetic controls. Fourth, analysis of unique features in the transcriptomes 
of each DiViD patient compared with the other DiViD patients, revealed elevated 
expression of central antiviral immune response genes in the whole-pancreas 
samples, but not in the pancreatic islets, of one DiViD patient. This difference 
in the extent of antiviral gene expression suggests different statuses of 
infection in the pancreas at the time of sampling between the DiViD patients, 
who were all enterovirus VP1+ in the islets by immunohistochemistry based on 
earlier studies. The observed features, indicating differences in the function, 
status and interplay between the exocrine and the endocrine pancreas of recent 
onset T1D patients, highlight the importance of studying both compartments for 
better understanding of the molecular mechanisms of T1D.

Copyright © 2022 Välikangas, Lietzén, Jaakkola, Krogvold, Eike, Kallionpää, 
Tuomela, Mathews, Gerling, Oikarinen, Hyöty, Dahl-Jorgensen, Elo and Lahesmaa.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2022.861985
PMCID: PMC9044038
PMID: 35498413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Author HH is employed by Fimlab Laboratories 
Ltd. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the 
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as 
a potential conflict of interest.