1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2022 Jul 26;13:881997. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2022.881997. eCollection 2022.

Detection of Antiviral Tissue Responses and Increased Cell Stress in the 
Pancreatic Islets of Newly Diagnosed Type 1 Diabetes Patients: Results From the 
DiViD Study.

Krogvold L(1)(2), Leete P(3), Mynarek IM(1)(4), Russell MA(3), Gerling IC(5), 
Lenchik NI(5), Mathews C(6), Richardson SJ(3), Morgan NG(3), Dahl-Jørgensen 
K(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Department, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(2)Faculty of Odontology, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(3)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, University of Exeter Medical 
School, Exeter, United Kingdom.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(5)Department of Medicine, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, 
Memphis, TN, United States.
(6)Department of Pathology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, United 
States.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The Diabetes Virus Detection (DiViD) study has suggested the 
presence of low-grade enteroviral infection in pancreatic tissue collected from 
six of six live adult patients newly diagnosed with type 1 diabetes. The present 
study aimed to compare the gene and protein expression of selected virally 
induced pathogen recognition receptors and interferon stimulated genes in islets 
from these newly diagnosed type 1 diabetes (DiViD) subjects vs age-matched 
non-diabetic (ND) controls.
METHODS: RNA was extracted from laser-captured islets and Affymetrix Human Gene 
2.0 ST arrays used to obtain gene expression profiles. Lists of differentially 
expressed genes were subjected to a data-mining pipeline searching for 
enrichment of canonical pathways, KEGG pathways, Gene Ontologies, transcription 
factor binding sites and other upstream regulators. In addition, the presence 
and localisation of specific viral response proteins (PKR, MxA and MDA5) were 
examined by combined immunofluorescent labelling in sections of pancreatic 
tissue.
RESULTS: The data analysis and data mining process revealed a significant 
enrichment of gene ontologies covering viral reproduction and infectious cycles; 
peptide translation, elongation and initiation, as well as oxidoreductase 
activity. Enrichment was identified in the KEGG pathways for oxidative 
phosphorylation; ribosomal and metabolic activity; antigen processing and 
presentation and in canonical pathways for mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative 
phosphorylation and EIF2 signaling. Protein Kinase R (PKR) expression did not 
differ between newly diagnosed type 1 diabetes and ND islets at the level of 
total RNA, but a small subset of β-cells displayed markedly increased PKR 
protein levels. These PKR+ β-cells correspond to those previously shown to 
contain the viral protein, VP1. RNA encoding MDA5 was increased significantly in 
newly diagnosed type 1 diabetes islets, and immunostaining of MDA5 protein was 
seen in α- and certain β-cells in both newly diagnosed type 1 diabetes and ND 
islets, but the expression was increased in β-cells in type 1 diabetes. In 
addition, an uncharacterised subset of synaptophysin positive, but islet hormone 
negative, cells expressed intense MDA5 staining and these were more prevalent in 
DiViD cases. MxA RNA was upregulated in newly diagnosed type 1 diabetes vs ND 
islets and MxA protein was detected exclusively in newly diagnosed type 1 
diabetes β-cells.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: The gene expression signatures reveal that pathways 
associated with cellular stress and increased immunological activity are 
enhanced in islets from newly diagnosed type 1 diabetes patients compared to 
controls. The increases in viral response proteins seen in β-cells in newly 
diagnosed type 1 diabetes provide clear evidence for the activation of IFN 
signalling pathways. As such, these data strengthen the hypothesis that an 
enteroviral infection of islet β-cells contributes to the pathogenesis of type 1 
diabetes.

Copyright © 2022 Krogvold, Leete, Mynarek, Russell, Gerling, Lenchik, Mathews, 
Richardson, Morgan and Dahl-Jørgensen.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2022.881997
PMCID: PMC9360491
PMID: 35957810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.