1. Diabetologia. 2022 Dec;65(12):2108-2120. doi: 10.1007/s00125-022-05779-2. Epub
 2022 Aug 12.

Live enteroviruses, but not other viruses, detected in human pancreas at the 
onset of type 1 diabetes in the DiViD study.

Krogvold L(1)(2), Genoni A(3), Puggioni A(3), Campani D(4), Richardson SJ(5), 
Flaxman CS(5), Edwin B(6), Buanes T(6), Dahl-Jørgensen K(7)(8), Toniolo A(9).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, 
Oslo, Norway. lars.krogvold@gmail.com.
(2)Institute of Clinical Dentistry, Faculty of Dentistry, University of Oslo, 
Oslo, Norway. lars.krogvold@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Biotechnology and Life Sciences, University of Insubria, 
Varese, Italy.
(4)Department of Surgical, Medical and Molecular Pathology and Critical Care, 
University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
(5)Islet Biology Group (IBEx), Exeter Centre of Excellence in Diabetes (EXCEED), 
University of Exeter College of Medicine and Health, Exeter, UK.
(6)Department for HPB Surgery, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(7)Division of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, 
Oslo, Norway.
(8)Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, 
Oslo, Norway.
(9)Global Virus Network, University of Insubria, Varese, Italy.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Enterovirus (EV) infection of pancreatic islet cells is one 
possible factor contributing to type 1 diabetes development. We have reported 
the presence of EV genome by PCR and of EV proteins by immunohistochemistry in 
pancreatic sections. Here we explore multiple human virus species in the 
Diabetes Virus Detection (DiViD) study cases using innovative methods, including 
virus passage in cell cultures.
METHODS: Six recent-onset type 1 diabetes patients (age 24-35) were included in 
the DiViD study. Minimal pancreatic tail resection was performed under sterile 
conditions. Eleven live cases (age 43-83) of pancreatic carcinoma without 
diabetes served as control cases. In the present study, we used EV detection 
methods that combine virus growth in cell culture, gene amplification and 
detection of virus-coded proteins by immunofluorescence. Pancreas homogenates in 
cell culture medium were incubated with EV-susceptible cell lines for 3 days. 
Two to three blind passages were performed. DNA and RNA were extracted from both 
pancreas tissue and cell cultures. Real-time PCR was used for detecting 20 
different viral agents other than EVs (six herpesviruses, human polyomavirus [BK 
virus and JC virus], parvovirus B19, hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus, 
hepatitis A virus, mumps, rubella, influenza A/B, parainfluenza 1-4, respiratory 
syncytial virus, astrovirus, norovirus, rotavirus). EV genomes were detected by 
endpoint PCR using five primer pairs targeting the partially conserved 5' 
untranslated region genome region of the A, B, C and D species. Amplicons were 
sequenced. The expression of EV capsid proteins was evaluated in cultured cells 
using a panel of EV antibodies.
RESULTS: Samples from six of six individuals with type 1 diabetes (cases) and 
two of 11 individuals without diabetes (control cases) contained EV genomes 
(p<0.05). In contrast, genomes of 20 human viruses other than EVs could be 
detected only once in an individual with diabetes (Epstein-Barr virus) and once 
in an individual without diabetes (parvovirus B19). EV detection was confirmed 
by immunofluorescence of cultured cells incubated with pancreatic extracts: 
viral antigens were expressed in the cytoplasm of approximately 1% of cells. 
Notably, infection could be transmitted from EV-positive cell cultures to 
uninfected cell cultures using supernatants filtered through 100 nm membranes, 
indicating that infectious agents of less than 100 nm were present in 
pancreases. Due to the slow progression of infection in EV-carrying cell 
cultures, cytopathic effects were not observed by standard microscopy but were 
recognised by measuring cell viability. Sequences of 5' untranslated region 
amplicons were compatible with EVs of the B, A and C species. Compared with 
control cell cultures exposed to EV-negative pancreatic extracts, EV-carrying 
cell cultures produced significantly higher levels of IL-6, IL-8 and monocyte 
chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP1).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Sensitive assays confirm that the pancreases of all 
DiViD cases contain EVs but no other viruses. Analogous EV strains have been 
found in pancreases of two of 11 individuals without diabetes. The detected EV 
strains can be passaged in series from one cell culture to another in the form 
of poorly replicating live viruses encoding antigenic proteins recognised by 
multiple EV-specific antibodies. Thus, the early phase of type 1 diabetes is 
associated with a low-grade infection by EVs, but not by other viral agents.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00125-022-05779-2
PMCID: PMC9630231
PMID: 35953727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]