1. Antiviral Res. 2024 Nov;231:106021. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2024.106021. Epub
 2024 Oct 15.

Vemurafenib inhibits the replication of diabetogenic enteroviruses in intestinal 
epithelial and pancreatic beta cells.

Butrym M(1), Byvald F(2), Blanter M(3), Ringqvist EE(4), Vasylovska S(5), 
Marjomäki V(6), Lau J(7), Stone VM(8), Flodström-Tullberg M(9).

Author information:
(1)Center for Infectious Medicine, Department of Medicine Huddinge / ANA Futura, 
Karolinska Institutet, Alfred Nobels Allé 8, 141 52, Stockholm, Sweden. 
Electronic address: marta.butrym@ki.se.
(2)Center for Infectious Medicine, Department of Medicine Huddinge / ANA Futura, 
Karolinska Institutet, Alfred Nobels Allé 8, 141 52, Stockholm, Sweden. 
Electronic address: fabian.byvald@ki.se.
(3)Center for Infectious Medicine, Department of Medicine Huddinge / ANA Futura, 
Karolinska Institutet, Alfred Nobels Allé 8, 141 52, Stockholm, Sweden. 
Electronic address: m.l.blanter@lumc.nl.
(4)Center for Infectious Medicine, Department of Medicine Huddinge / ANA Futura, 
Karolinska Institutet, Alfred Nobels Allé 8, 141 52, Stockholm, Sweden. 
Electronic address: emma.ringqvist@ki.se.
(5)Department of Medical Cell Biology, Uppsala University, BOX 571, 751 23, 
Uppsala, Sweden. Electronic address: svitlana.vasylovska@mcb.uu.se.
(6)Department of Biological and Environmental Science, University of Jyväskylä, 
P.O. Box 35, FI-40014, Jyväskylä, Finland. Electronic address: 
varpu.s.marjomaki@jyu.fi.
(7)Department of Medical Cell Biology, Uppsala University, BOX 571, 751 23, 
Uppsala, Sweden. Electronic address: joey.lau@mcb.uu.se.
(8)Center for Infectious Medicine, Department of Medicine Huddinge / ANA Futura, 
Karolinska Institutet, Alfred Nobels Allé 8, 141 52, Stockholm, Sweden. 
Electronic address: virginia.stone@ki.se.
(9)Center for Infectious Medicine, Department of Medicine Huddinge / ANA Futura, 
Karolinska Institutet, Alfred Nobels Allé 8, 141 52, Stockholm, Sweden. 
Electronic address: malin.flodstrom-tullberg@ki.se.

Enteroviruses, which infect via the gut, have been implicated in type 1 diabetes 
(T1D) development. Prolonged faecal shedding of enterovirus has been associated 
with islet autoimmunity. Additionally, enteroviral proteins and viral RNA have 
been detected in the pancreatic islets of individuals with recent-onset T1D, 
implicating their possible role in beta cell destruction. Despite this, no 
approved antiviral drugs currently exist that specifically target enterovirus 
infections for utilisation in disease interventions. Drug repurposing allows for 
the discovery of new clinical uses for existing drugs and can expedite drug 
discovery. Previously, the cancer drug Vemurafenib demonstrated unprecedented 
antiviral activity against several enteroviruses. In the present study, we 
assessed the efficacy of Vemurafenib and an analogue thereof in preventing 
infection or reducing the replication of enteroviruses associated with T1D. We 
tested Vemurafenib in intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) and insulin-producing 
beta cells. Additionally, we established a protocol for infecting human stem 
cell-derived islets (SC-islets) and used Vemurafenib and its analogue in this 
model. Our studies revealed that Vemurafenib exhibited strong antiviral 
properties in IECs and a beta cell line. The antiviral effect was also seen with 
the Vemurafenib analogue. SC-islets expressed the viral receptors CAR and DAF, 
with their highest expression in insulin- and glucagon-positive cells, 
respectively. SC-islets were successfully infected by CVBs and the antiviral 
activity of Vemurafenib and its analogue was confirmed in most SC-islet batches. 
In summary, our observations suggest that Vemurafenib and its analogue warrant 
further exploration as potential antiviral agents for the treatment of 
enterovirus-induced diseases, including T1D.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2024.106021
PMID: 39419452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.