1. Front Immunol. 2024 Jan 4;14:1326711. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1326711. 
eCollection 2023.

Immunological and virological triggers of type 1 diabetes: insights and 
implications.

Lemos JRN(1), Hirani K(1)(2), von Herrath M(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Diabetes Research Institute (DRI), University of Miami Miller School of 
Medicine, Miami, FL, United States.
(2)Division of Endocrine, Diabetes, and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, 
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, United States.
(3)Global Chief Medical Office, Novo Nordisk A/S, Søborg, Denmark.

Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is caused by an autoimmune process which culminates in the 
destruction of insulin-producing beta cells in the pancreas. It is widely 
believed that a complex and multifactorial interplay between genetic and 
environmental factors, such as viruses, play a crucial role in the development 
of the disease. Research over the past few decades has shown that there is not 
one single viral culprit, nor one single genetic pathway, causing the disease. 
Rather, viral infections, most notably enteroviruses (EV), appear to accelerate 
the autoimmune process leading to T1D and are often seen as a precipitator of 
clinical diagnosis. In support of this hypothesis, the use of anti-viral drugs 
has recently shown efficacy in preserving beta cell function after onset of 
diabetes. In this review, we will discuss the various pathways that viral 
infections utilize to accelerate the development of T1D. There are three key 
mechanisms linking viral infections to beta-cell death: One is modulated by the 
direct infection of islets by viruses, resulting in their impaired function, 
another occurs in a more indirect fashion, by modulating the immune system, and 
the third is caused by heightened stress on the beta-cell by interferon-mediated 
increase of insulin resistance. The first two aspects are surprisingly difficult 
to study, in the case of the former, because there are still many questions 
about how viruses might persist for longer time periods. In the latter, 
indirect/immune case, viruses might impact immunity as a hit-and-run scenario, 
meaning that many or all direct viral footprints quickly vanish, while changes 
imprinted upon the immune system and the anti-islet autoimmune response persist. 
Given the fact that viruses are often associated with the precipitation of 
clinical autoimmunity, there are concerns regarding the impact of the recent 
global coronavirus-2019 (COVID-19) pandemic on the development of autoimmune 
disease. The long-term effects of COVID-19 infection on T1D will therefore be 
discussed, including the increased development of new cases of T1D. 
Understanding the interplay between viral infections and autoimmunity is crucial 
for advancing our knowledge in this field and developing targeted therapeutic 
interventions. In this review we will examine the intricate relationship between 
viral infections and autoimmunity and discuss potential considerations for 
prevention and treatment strategies.

Copyright © 2024 Lemos, Hirani and von Herrath.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1326711
PMCID: PMC10794398
PMID: 38239343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Author MH was employed by the company Novo 
Nordisk A/S. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in 
the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed 
as a potential conflict of interest.