1. Mater Sci Eng C Mater Biol Appl. 2016 Dec 1;69:1137-46. doi: 
10.1016/j.msec.2016.08.012. Epub 2016 Aug 5.

Fabrication of hydrogel based nanocomposite scaffold containing bioactive glass 
nanoparticles for myocardial tissue engineering.

Barabadi Z(1), Azami M(1), Sharifi E(2), Karimi R(1), Lotfibakhshaiesh N(1), 
Roozafzoon R(1), Joghataei MT(3), Ai J(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Tissue Engineering and Applied Cell Sciences, School of 
Advanced Technologies in Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran.
(2)Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Shahrekord University of Medical 
Sciences, Shahrekord, Iran.
(3)Anatomy Department, Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Department of Tissue Engineering and Applied Cell Sciences, School of 
Advanced Technologies in Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran; Brain and Spinal Injury Research Center, Tehran University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address: jafar_ai@tums.ac.ir.

Selecting suitable cell sources and angiogenesis induction are two important 
issues in myocardial tissue engineering. Human endometrial stromal cells (EnSCs) 
have been introduced as an abundant and easily available resource in 
regenerative medicine. Bioactive glass is an agent that induces angiogenesis and 
has been studied in some experiments. The aim of this study was to investigate 
in vitro differentiation capacity of endometrial stem cells into cardiomyocyte 
lineage and to evaluate capability of bioactive glass nanoparticles toward EnSCs 
differentiation into endothelial lineage and angiogenesis on hydrogel scaffold. 
Our findings suggests that endometrial stem cells could be programmed into 
cardiomyocyte linage and considered a suitable cell source for myocardial 
regeneration. This experiment also revealed that inclusion of bioactive glass 
nanoparticles in hydrogel scaffold could improve angiogenesis through 
differentiating EnSCs toward endothelial lineage and increasing level of 
vascular endothelial growth factor secretion.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.msec.2016.08.012
PMID: 27612811 [Indexed for MEDLINE]