1. J Rheumatol. 2024 Apr 1;51(4):350-359. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.2023-0907.

Polyautoimmunity in Patients With Anticyclic Citrullinated Peptide 
Antibody-Positive and -Negative Rheumatoid Arthritis: a Nationwide Cohort Study 
From Denmark.

Kristensen S(1), Hagelskjær AM(2), Cordtz R(3), Bliddal S(4), Mortensen AS(2), 
Nielsen CH(5), Feldt-Rasmussen U(6), Lauridsen KB(7), Dreyer L(8).

Author information:
(1)S. Kristensen, MD, PhD, Center for Rheumatic Research Aalborg and Department 
of Rheumatology Aalborg University Hospital, and Department of Clinical 
Medicine, Aalborg University, Aalborg; sakr@rn.dk.
(2)A.M. Hagelskjær, MD, A.S. Mortensen, BSc, Center for Rheumatic Research 
Aalborg and Department of Rheumatology, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg.
(3)R. Cordtz, MD, PhD, Center for Rheumatic Research Aalborg and Department of 
Rheumatology, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, and DANBIO, Center for 
Rheumatology and Spine Diseases, Centre of Head and Orthopedics, Rigshospitalet, 
Glostrup.
(4)S. Bliddal, MD, PhD, Department of Medical Endocrinology and Metabolism, 
Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen.
(5)C.H. Nielsen, MD, DMSc, Institute for Inflammation Research, Center for 
Rheumatology and Spine Diseases, Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, 
Copenhagen.
(6)U. Feldt-Rasmussen, MD, DMSc, Department of Medical Endocrinology and 
Metabolism, Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, and Institute of 
Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Health and Clinical Sciences, Copenhagen 
University, Copenhagen.
(7)K.B. Lauridsen, MD, Center for Rheumatic Research Aalborg and Department of 
Rheumatology, and Department of Clinical Immunology, Aalborg University 
Hospital, Aalborg.
(8)L. Dreyer, MD, PhD, Center for Rheumatic Research Aalborg and Department of 
Rheumatology, Aalborg University Hospital, and Department of Clinical Medicine, 
Aalborg University, Aalborg, and DANBIO, Center for Rheumatology and Spine 
Diseases, Centre of Head and Orthopedics, Rigshospitalet, Glostrup, and Clinical 
Cancer Research Unit, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark.

OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to compare the prevalence and incidence of 
polyautoimmunity between anticyclic citrullinated peptide antibody 
(anti-CCP)-positive and anti-CCP-negative patients with rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA).
METHODS: In a nationwide register-based cohort study, patients with RA (disease 
duration ≤ 2 yrs) in the DANBIO rheumatology register with an available anti-CCP 
test in the Register of Laboratory Results for Research were identified. The 
polyautoimmunity outcome included 21 nonrheumatic autoimmune diseases identified 
by linkage between the Danish Patient Registry and Prescription Registry. The 
age- and sex-adjusted prevalence ratio (PR) was calculated by modified Poisson 
regression to estimate the prevalence at diagnosis in anti-CCP-positive vs 
anti-CCP-negative patients. The hazard ratio (HR) of polyautoimmunity within 5 
years of entry into DANBIO was estimated in cause-specific Cox regression 
models.
RESULTS: The study included 5839 anti-CCP-positive and 3799 anti-CCP-negative 
patients with RA. At first visit, the prevalence of prespecified polyautoimmune 
diseases in the Danish registers was 11.1% and 11.9% in anti-CCP-positive and 
anti-CCP-negative patients, respectively (PR 0.93, 95% CI 0.84-1.05). The most 
frequent autoimmune diseases were autoimmune thyroid disease, inflammatory bowel 
disease, and type 1 diabetes mellitus. During a mean follow-up of 3.5 years, 
only a few (n = 210) patients developed polyautoimmunity (HR 0.6, 95% CI 
0.46-0.79).
CONCLUSION: Polyautoimmunity as captured through the Danish National Patient 
Registry occurred in approximately 1 in 10 patients with RA at time of diagnosis 
regardless of anti-CCP status. In the years subsequent to the RA diagnosis, only 
a few and mainly anti-CCP-negative patients developed autoimmune disease.

Copyright © 2024 by the Journal of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.3899/jrheum.2023-0907
PMID: 38302173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]