1. Diabetologia. 2026 Jan;69(1):50-58. doi: 10.1007/s00125-025-06561-w. Epub 2025
 Oct 14.

Uric acid and future complications in young individuals with type 1 diabetes: 
results from the Diabetes Incidence Study in Sweden (DISS) and the National 
Diabetes Registry of Sweden (NDR).

Fagher K(1)(2), Eeg-Olofsson K(3)(4), Arnqvist H(5), Bolinder J(6), Eriksson 
JW(7), Gudbjörnsdottir S(3)(4), Nyström L(8), Landin-Olsson M(9)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Lund, Sweden. 
Katarina.fagher@med.lu.se.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden. 
Katarina.fagher@med.lu.se.
(3)The Swedish National Diabetes Registry, Centre of Registries, Gothenburg, 
Sweden.
(4)Department of Molecular and Clinical Medicine, Institute of Medicine, 
University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(5)DISS Study Group, Division of Endocrinology, Department of Biomedical and 
Clinical Sciences, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.
(6)DISS Study Group, Department of Medicine, Karolinska University Hospital 
Huddinge, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.
(7)DISS Study Group, Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, 
Uppsala, Sweden.
(8)DISS Study Group, Department of Epidemiology and Global Health, Umeå 
University, Umeå, Sweden.
(9)Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
(10)Department of Endocrinology, Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
(11)DISS Study Group, Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The aim of this work was to investigate whether baseline uric 
acid (UA) is associated with future complications among young individuals with 
newly diagnosed type 1 diabetes.
METHODS: UA levels were analysed in individuals, aged 15-34 years with newly 
diagnosed type 1 diabetes, from the nationwide Diabetes Incidence Study in 
Sweden (DISS) cohort to assess the relationship with macro- and microvascular 
complications later in life. Information on complications was obtained by record 
linkage to the National Diabetes Registry of Sweden and the National Patient 
Registry of Sweden. Individuals who developed complications during follow-up 
(n = 94) were matched for year and age at diagnosis (±2 years), sex and HbA1c 
with control individuals (n = 94) without complications.
RESULTS: Plasma UA levels at the time of diabetes diagnosis were significantly 
higher in individuals who later developed diabetes-related complications 
compared with those who did not, after a median follow-up of 19.0 years (IQR 
16.3-21.0): 209.2 ± 68.9 vs 171.7 ± 50.2 µmol/l (p<0.001). The odds of 
developing complications were 1% higher for every 1 μmol/l rise in baseline UA, 
and individuals within the highest quartile of UA were more than three times 
more likely to develop diabetes-related complications later in life after 
adjusting for age, HbA1c, smoking and eGFR.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: This study indicates that higher baseline UA levels 
at the time of type 1 diabetes diagnosis may be linked to both macrovascular and 
microvascular complications later in life.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00125-025-06561-w
PMCID: PMC12686092
PMID: 41085706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Acknowledgements: We would like to acknowledge 
B. Ekholm (Lund University, Sweden) for help with the blood sample analysis and 
D. Hjorthorn (Daniel Olsson Development LLC, Sweden) for contributing to 
statistical advice and matching procedure. Data availability: Data presented in 
the analysis are available on request from the corresponding author. Funding: 
Open access funding provided by Lund University. This study was funded by 
unrestricted grants from Sweden’s Southern Healthcare Region, the Skåne 
University Hospital economic support for research, Sydvastra Skanes 
Diabetesforening and Faculty of Medicine (ALF), Lund University, Sweden. 
Authors’ relationships and activities: KF has received honoraria for consulting 
and/or lecture fees from Sanofi, Astra Zeneca, Novo Nordisk, Bayer and Amarin, 
all outside the submitted work. KEO has received fees for lecturing and/or 
honoraria for consulting from Sanofi, Novo Nordisk, Eli Lilly and Abbot Diabetes 
Care, all outside the submitted work. JB has received honoraria for consulting 
and/or lecture fees from Abbott Diabetes Care, Nanexa, Novo Nordisk and Sanofi, 
all outside the submitted work. The authors declare that there are no other 
relationships or activities that might bias, or be perceived to bias, their 
work. Contribution statement: All authors meet the ICMJE criteria for authorship 
for this article and take responsibility for the integrity of the work as a 
whole, and have contributed to methodology, reviewed the article critically for 
intellectual content, and have approved the final version of the manuscript. KF 
and MLO were involved in the design of the study. KF conceived the study, 
collected and analysed data and wrote the first draft of the manuscript. KEO 
contributed to the NDR data. KF is the guarantor of this work and, as such, had 
full access to all the data in the study and takes responsibility for the 
integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis.