1. Endocr Rev. 2023 Jul 11;44(4):737-751. doi: 10.1210/endrev/bnad007.

Coxsackievirus and Type 1 Diabetes: Diabetogenic Mechanisms and Implications for 
Prevention.

Carré A(1), Vecchio F(1), Flodström-Tullberg M(2), You S(1), Mallone R(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Université Paris Cité, Institut Cochin, CNRS, INSERM, 75014 Paris, France.
(2)Department of Medicine Huddinge and Karolinska University Hospital, 
Karolinska Institutet, 14152 Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Paris 
Centre-Université de Paris, Cochin Hospital, Service de Diabétologie et 
Immunologie Clinique, 75014 Paris, France.

The evidence for an association between coxsackievirus B (CVB) infection, 
pancreatic islet autoimmunity, and clinical type 1 diabetes is increasing. 
Results from prospective cohorts and pancreas histopathology studies have 
provided a compelling case. However, the demonstration of a causal relationship 
is missing, and is likely to remain elusive until tested in humans by avoiding 
exposure to this candidate viral trigger. To this end, CVB vaccines have been 
developed and are entering clinical trials. However, the progress made in 
understanding the biology of the virus and in providing tools to address the 
long-standing question of causality contrasts with the scarcity of information 
about the antiviral immune responses triggered by infection. Beta-cell death may 
be primarily induced by CVB itself, possibly in the context of poor immune 
protection, or secondarily provoked by T-cell responses against CVB-infected 
beta cells. The possible involvement of epitope mimicry mechanisms skewing the 
physiological antiviral response toward autoimmunity has also been suggested. We 
here review the available evidence for each of these 3 non-mutually exclusive 
scenarios. Understanding which ones are at play is critical to maximize the odds 
of success of CVB vaccination, and to develop suitable tools to monitor the 
efficacy of immunization and its intermingling with autoimmune onset or 
prevention.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Endocrine Society. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1210/endrev/bnad007
PMID: 36884282 [Indexed for MEDLINE]